Peace to this meeting, whereforewe are met.
Unto our brother France and toour sister,
health and fair time of day.
Joy and good wishes
to our most fair and princelycousin Katharine.
And as a branch and member ofthis royalty
by whom this great assembly iscontrived,
we do salute you, Duke ofBurgundy.
And princes French and peers,health to you all.
Right joyous are we to beholdyour face,
most worthy brother England.
Fairly met.
And so are you, princes English,every one.
So happy be the issue, brotherEngland,
of this good day and of thisgracious meeting
as we are now glad to beholdyour eyes,
your eyes, which hitherto haveborne in them
against the French that met themin their bent
the fatal balls of murderingbasilisks.
The venom of such looks, wefairly hope,
have lost their quality
and that this day shall change
all griefs and quarrels intolove.
To cry amen to that, thus weappear.
You English princes all,
I do salute you.
My duty to you both, on equallove,
great kings of France andEngland.
That I have labored
with all my wits, my pains, andstrong endeavors
to bring Your Most ImperialMajesties
unto this barand royalinterview,
your mightiness on both partsbest can witness.
Since then, my office hath sofar prevailed
that, face to face and royal eyeto eye,
you have congreeted,
let it not disgrace me
if I demand, before this royalview,
what rub or what impedimentthere is,
why that the naked, poor, andmangled peace--
dear nurse of arts, plenties,and joyful births--
should not in this best gardenof the world,
our fertile France,
put up her lovely visage?
Alas, from France, she hath toolong been chased,
and all her husbandry doth lieon heaps,
corrupting in its own fertility.
Her vine, the merry cheerer ofthe heart,
unpruned dies.
Her hedges even-pleached,
like prisoners wildly overgrownwith hair,
put forth disordered twigs.
Her fallow leas,
the darnel, hemlock, and rankfumitory
doth root upon,
while that the coulter rusts
that should deracinate suchsavagery.
The even mead
that erst brought sweetly forth
the freckled cowslip, burnet,and green clover,
wanting the scythe, alluncorrected, rank,
conceives by idleness,
and nothing teems but hatefuldocks,
rough thistles, kexes, burs,
losing both beauty and utility.
And as our vineyards, fallows,meads, and hedges,
defective in their natures, growto wildness,
even so our houses and ourselvesand children have lost
or do not learn for want of time
the sciences that should becomeour country
but grow like savages--
as soldiers will that nothing dobut meditate on blood--
to swearing and stern looks,diffused attire,
and everything that seemsunnatural,
which to reduce into our formerfavor
you are assembled.
And my speech entreats that Imay know the let,
why gentle peace
should not expel theseinconveniences
and bless us
with her former qualities.
If, Duke of Burgundy, you wouldthe peace,
whose want gives growth
to the imperfections which youhave cited,
you must buy that peace
with full accord to all our justdemands,
whose tenors and particulareffects
you have enscheduled briefly inyour hands.
The king hath heard them.
To the which, as yet, there isno answer made.
Well, then, the peace,
which you before so urged,
lies in his answer.
I have but with a cursorary eyeo'erglanced the articles.
Pleaseth Your Grace
to appoint some of your council
presently to sit with us oncemore,
with better heed to re-surveythem,
and we will suddenly pass
our accept and peremptoryanswer.
Brother, we shall.
Go, Uncle Exeter and BrotherClarence
and you, Brother Gloucester andWarwick too.
Go with the king,
and take with you free power toratify, augment, or alter
as your wisdoms best shall seeadvantagable for our dignity,
anything in or out of ourdemands,
and we'll consign thereto.
Will you,
fair sister,
go with the princes or stay herewith us?
Our gracious brother, I will gowith them.
Haply, a woman's voice may dosome good
when articles too nicely urgedbe stood on.
Yet leave our cousin Katharinehere with us.
She is our capital demand,
comprised within the fore-rankof our articles.
She hath good leave.
Fair Katharine, and most fair,
will you vouchsafe to teach asoldier
terms such as will enter at alady's ear
and plead his love suit
to her gentle heart?
Your Majesty shall at mock me.
I cannot speak your England.
Oh, fair Katharine,
if you will love me soundly withyour French heart,
I will be glad to hear youconfess it brokenly
with your English tongue.
Do you like me, Kate?
Pardonnez-moi, I cannot tellwhat is "like me."
An angel is like you, Kate,
and you are like an angel.
Que dit-il?
Que je suis semblable a lesanges?
Oui, vraiment, sauf votre grace,ainsi dit-il.
I said so, dear Katharine,
and I must not blush to affirmit.
Oh, bon Dieu.
Les langues des hommes sontpleines de tromperies.
What says she, fair one?
That the tongues of men are fullof deceits?
Oui, dat de tongues of de mansis be full of deceit.
That is the princess.
The princess is the betterEnglishwoman.
I' faith, Kate, my wooing is fitfor thy understanding.
I'm glad thou canst speak nobetter English,
for if thou couldst,
thou would find me such a plainking
thou would think I'd sold myfarm
to buy my crown.
I know no ways to mince it inlove
but directly to say, "I loveyou."
Then if you urge me farther thanto say, "Do you i' faith?"
I wear out my suit.
Give me your answer.
I' faith, do.
And so clap hands and a bargain.
How say you, lady?
Sauf votre honneur, meunderstand well.
Marry, if you would put me toverses
or to dance for your sake, Kate,
why, you undid me.
For the one, I have neitherwords nor measure.
For the other, I have nostrength in measure,
yet a reasonable measure instrength.
If I could win a lady atleapfrog
or by vaulting into my saddlewith my armor on my back,
under the correction of braggingbe it spoke,
I should quickly leap into awife.
Or if I might buffet for my love
or bound my horse for herfavors,
I could lay on like a butcher,
sit like a jackanapes, neveroff.
But, before God, Kate,
I cannot look greenly
nor gasp out my eloquence,
nor I have no cunning inprotestation,
only downright oaths,
which I never use till urged
nor never break for urging.
If thou canst love a fellow ofthis temper, Kate,
whose face is not worthsunburning,
who never looks in his glass
for love of anything he seesthere,
let thine eye be thy cook.
I speak to thee plain soldier.
If thou canst love me for this,take me.
If not, to say to thee that Ishall die is true.
But for thy love, by the Lord,no.
And yet I love thee too.
Whilst thou livest, dear Kate,
take a fellow of plain anduncoined constancy,
for he perforce must do theeright,
because he hath not the gift towoo in other places.
These fellows of infinite tongue
that can rhyme themselves intoladies' favors,
they do always reason themselvesout again.
What?
A speaker is but a prater.
A rhyme is but a ballad.
A good leg will fall.
A straight back will stoop.
A black beard will turn white.
A curled pate will grow bald.
A fair face will wither
and a full eye wax hollow,
but a good heart, Kate,
is the sun and moon--
or rather the sun and not themoon,
for it shines bright
and never changes
but keeps his course truly.
If thou would have such a one,
take me.
And take me, take a soldier.
Take a soldier, take a king.
What sayest thou, then, to mylove?
Speak, my fair, and fairly, Ipray thee.
Is it possible dat I should lovede enemy of France?
No, it is not possible
that you should love the enemyof France, Kate.
But in loving me,
you should love the friend ofFrance,
for I love France so well,
I will not part with a villageof it.
I will have it all mine.
Kate, when France is mine
and I am yours,
then yours is France, and youare mine.
I cannot tell what is dat.
No, Kate.
I will tell thee in French,
which I am sure will hang uponmy tongue
as a newly married wife abouther husband's neck,
hardly to be shook off.
Je...
quand sur le possession deFrance...
et quand vous avez le possessionde moi--
Let me see, what then?
Saint Denis be my speed.
Donc votre est France et vousetes mienne.
It is as easy for me, Kate, toconquer the kingdom
as to speak so much more French.
I shall never move thee inFrench, Kate,
unless it be to laugh at me.
But dost thou understand thusmuch English?
Canst thou love me?
I cannot tell.
Can any of your neighbors tell,Kate?
I'll ask them.
Come, I know thou lovest me.
And at night, when you come intoyour closet,
you'll question this gentlewomanabout me.
And I know, Kate, you will toher dispraise
those parts in me you love withyour heart.
But, good Kate, mock memercifully.
The rather, gentle princess,because I love thee cruelly.
If ever thou beest mine,
as I have a saving faith withinme tells me thou shalt,
I get thee with scambling,
and thou must therefore needsprove
a good soldier breeder.
Shall not thou and I,
between Saint Denis and SaintGeorge,
compound a boy, half French,half English,
who'll go to Constantinople andtake the Turk by the beard?
Shall we not?
What sayest thou, my fairflower-de-luce?
I do not know dat.
No, 'tis hereafter to know butnow to promise.
Do but now promise, Kate, youwill endeavor
for your French part of such aboy.
And for my English moiety,
take the word of a king and abachelor.
How answer you,
la plus belle Katherine dumonde,
mon tres cher et divin deesse?
Your Majestee have false Frenchenough
to deceive de most sagedamoiselle
dat is en France.
Now, fie upon my false French.
By mine honor, in true English,I love thee, Kate.
By which honor I dare not swearthou lovest me,
yet my blood begins to flatterme that thou dost.
Therefore tell me, most fairKatharine,
will you have me?
Put off your maiden blushes.
Avouch the thoughts of yourheart
with the looks of an empress.
Take me by the hand,
and say, "Harry of England, I amthine,"
which word thou shalt no soonerbless mine ear withal,
but I shall tell thee aloud,
"England is thine,
"Ireland is thine,
"France is thine,
and Henry Plantagenet is thine."
Though I speak it before hisface,
if he be not fellow with thebest king,
thou shalt find the best king ofgood fellows.
Come, your answer in brokenmusic,
for thy voice is music and thyEnglish broken.
Therefore, queen of all,Katharine,
break thy mind to me in brokenEnglish.
Wilt thou have me?
That is as it shall please deroi mon pere.
Nay, it will please him well,Kate.
It shall please him, Kate.
Den it shall also content me.
Upon that, I kiss your hand andcall you my queen.
Laissez, mon seigneur, laissez,laissez!
Ma foi, je ne veux point
que vous abaissez votre grandeuren baisant la main
d'une de votre seigeurie indigneserviteur.
Excusez-moi,
je vous supplie,
mon tres-puissant seigneur.
Then I will kiss your lips,Kate.
Les dames et demoiselles
pour etre baisees devant leurnoces,
il n'est pas la coutume deFrance.
Madame my interpreter, what saysshe?
Dat it is not be de fashion pourles ladies of France--
I cannot tell what is baiser enAnglish.
To kiss.
Your Majestee entendre bettreque moi.
It is not a fashion for themaids in France
to kiss before they are married,would she say?
Oui, vraiment.
Oh, Kate, nice customs curtsy togreat kings.
Dear Kate, you and I
cannot be confined within theweak list
of a country's fashion.
We are the makers of manners,Kate.
The liberty that follows ourplaces
stops the mouth of allfindfaults...
as I will do yours
for upholding the nice fashionof your country
in denying me a kiss.
Therefore, patiently andyielding.
You have witchcraft in yourlips, Kate.
There is more eloquence in asugar touch of them
than in the tongues of theFrench council.
And they should sooner persuadeHenry of England
than a general petition ofmonarchs.
Here comes your father.
God save Your Majesty.
My royal cousin, teach you ourprincess English?
I would have her learn, my faircousin,
how perfectly I love her.
And that is good English.
We have consented to all termsof reason.
Is't so, my lords of England?
The king hath granted everyarticle.
His daughter first and then insequel all
according to their firm proposednatures.
Take her, fair son,
and from her blood,
raise up issue to me
that the contending kingdoms ofFrance and England,
whose very shores look pale withenvy
of each other's happiness,
may cease their hatred.
And this dear conjunction
plant neighborhood andChristian-like accord
in their sweet bosoms,
that never war advance hisbleeding sword
'twixt England
and fair France.
Amen.
Now, welcome, Kate.
And bear me witness all,
that here I kiss her as mysovereign queen.
God, the best maker of allmarriages,
combine your hearts in one, yourrealms in one.
As man and wife, being two, areone in love,
so be there 'twixt your kingdomssuch a spousal
that never may ill office orfell jealousy,
which troubles oft the bed ofblessed marriage,
thrust in between the paction ofthese kingdoms
to make divorce of theirincorporate league,
that English may as French,French Englishmen,
receive each other.
God speak this Amen.
Amen.
Prepare we for our marriage,
on which day, my Lord ofBurgundy,
we'll take your oath,
and all the peers', for suretyof our leagues.
Then shall I swear to Kate
and you to me.
And may our oaths well kept andprosperous be.
Thus far, with rough andall-unable pen,
our bending author hath pursuedthe story,
in little room confining mightymen,
mangling by starts the fullcourse of their glory.
Small time,
but in that small,
most greatly lived this star ofEngland.
Fortune made his sword,
by which the world's best gardenhe achieved
and of it left his son imperiallord.
Henry VI, in infant bands
crowned King Of France andEngland,
did this king succeed,
whose state so many had themanaging
that they lost France and madehis England bleed,
which oft our stage hath shown,
and for their sake,
in your fair minds,
let this acceptance take.